\title{\textbf{Haiku}\\OS Report Part I}
\author{COMP 3000\\ \\Troy Hildebrandt -- 100xxxxxx\\Nima Hoda -- 100308135}
\date{\today}

\documentclass{article}

\usepackage{cite}
\usepackage{url}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{subfig}

% Page setup
% Shamelessly stolen from Pat Morin's Open Data Structures
\setlength{\textheight}{8.5in}
\setlength{\textwidth}{6in}
\setlength{\topmargin}{-0.375in}
\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{.25in}
\setlength{\evensidemargin}{.25in}
\setlength{\headheight}{0.200in}
\setlength{\headsep}{0.4in}
\setlength{\footskip}{0.500in}
\setlength{\parskip}{1.5ex}
\setlength{\parindent}{1.25cm}
%\flushbottom

\begin{document}
\maketitle

\section{Background}

Haiku is a portable \cite{HaikuFaq} free and open source
\cite{HaikuDevFaq} operating system for the 32-bit x86 architecture
\cite{HaikuFaq} targeting personal computing \cite{HaikuAbout}.  It
was originally named OpenBeOS after BeOS \cite{HaikuWiki}, the
short-lived proprietary operating system developed by Be,
Inc. throughout the 1990s, which focused on digital media work
\cite{BeosWiki}.

BeOS boasted an object-oriented C++ API, a fully integrated graphical
user environment, a modern multiprocessing, preemptively multitasking
kernel, a journaling file system with a relational database-like
metadata facility \cite{BFSWiki} and included partial POSIX
compatibility.  However, despite having a devoted niche user base, it
could not yield a profit for Be, Inc. and, in 2001, was acquired by
Palm, Inc., ending further BeOS development \cite{BeosWiki}.

Disapointed with the loss, a group of BeOS enthusiasts began an
effort to rewrite BeOS as a free and open source project
\cite{BeosWiki, HaikuHistoryWiki}.  In 2004 the open source effort was
renamed Haiku, after the three line Japanese form of poetry which
appeared on occasion in BeOS error messages \cite{HaikuFaq,
  HaikuHistoryWiki}.

Haiku takes its inspiration from BeOS \cite{HaikuAbout} and aims to
recreate both the BeOS technologies and end user experience
\cite{HaikuFaq}.  Haiku uses the same window decoration style and
colour as BeOS \cite{HaikuWiki, BeosWiki} and aims to create a
unified, cohesive user interface \cite{HaikuAbout, HaikuHIG,
  HaikuIcon} reflecting the ``core qualities'' of ``elegance'' and
``simplicity'' found in BeOS \cite{HaikuFaq}.  Haiku also directly
incorporates two core BeOS user interface elements, the Tracker, a
file manager, and the Deskbar, a taskbar, which were open sourced by
Be, Inc. in 2001 \cite{HaikuFaq}.  Haiku also reimplements the
object-oriented C++ BeOS API\cite{HaikuWiki} as well as the Be File
System with, its advanced meta-data capabilities \cite{BFSWiki}.

Haiku is targetted towards the personal computer user
\cite{HaikuAbout}.  As such, it includes a fully integrated GUI
environment, rejecting the stacked nature of the X Window System on
UNIX-like operating systems \cite{HaikuFaq}.  The personal computing
focus is also reflected in Haiku's current lack of support for
multi-user operation, though are plans for such support in future
releases \cite{HaikuFuture}.  Haiku also aims to present a unified
human interface, both in terms of the operating system base as well as
in applications developed for Haiku.  This is reflected in the
development and maintenance of comprehensive Haiku human interface and
icon guidelines \cite{HaikuHIG, HaikuIcon}.

Haiku currently only supports the 32-bit x86 architecture, though
ports to other platforms, including x86-64, are being developed and
may be supported in the future \cite{HaikuFaq}.  On 32-bit x86, Haiku
aims for full source and binary compatibility with 32-bit x86 BeOS
applications.  Several major BeOS R5 applications already run
successfully on Haiku, including Opera, Firefox and Quake III
\cite{HaikuWiki}.  POSIX compatibility is also a Haiku goal
\cite{HaikuFuture, HaikuIncContracts}, as are the development of a
BSD-style ports collection \cite{HaikuPorts}, which would simplify the
building of 3rd party open-source software and a full package
management system to manage installation and dependency resolution of
3rd party software \cite{HaikuR1A3Notes}.

Haiku development is centred around the Haiku Project, an
international community of volunteers \cite{HaikuAbout}.  The project
maintains mailing lists, forums, IRC channels, \cite{HaikuComm} source
code repositories \cite{HaikuGetSvn} and several websites, including
the following:
\begin{itemize}
  \item \url{http://www.haiku-os.org/} -- the main project website
  \item \url{http://api.haiku-os.org/} -- containing Haiku API documentation
  \item \url{http://dev.haiku-os.org/} -- the Haiku project management
    system
  \item \url{http://www.haiku-files.org/} -- an archive of nightly
    builds for Haiku
  \item \url{http://ports.haiku-files.org/} -- the Haiku ports collection
    project management system
\end{itemize}

There are 81 developers with commit access to the Haiku source code
repository, with the top contributors ranking in the thousands of
commits over many years \cite{HaikuContrib}.  The source code is
revision controlled by an SVN repository and managed by Trac
\cite{HaikuDevStart}.  Write access to the repository is granted to
contributors on the basis of past contributions \cite{HaikuDevStart}.

In addition to voluntary contributions, the Haiku Project has also
participated in the Google Summer of Code (GSOC)---a program that
provides stipends to students who contribute to open-source software
\cite{GSOCWiki}---every year since 2007 \cite{HaikuGSOC}.  In 2010,
Haiku took contributions from seven students through GSOC
\cite{HaikuGSOC2010}.  Contributors are also sometimes contracted to
work full-time on Haiku, allowing them to dedicate large continuous
blocks of time to Haiku development \cite{HaikuIncContracts}.
Contract lengths have mostly been limited to several weeks but also
include a recently awarded six month contract
\cite{HaikuLongContract}.

The Haiku Project is supported financially by Haiku, Inc., a 501(c)(3)
charitable non-profit corporation founded in 2003 by Michael Phipps in
New York State's Division of Corporations \cite{HaikuIncAbout,
  HaikuInc}.  Haiku, Inc., funded through donations, has a 2011
operating budget of \$25,500 \cite{HaikuIncDocs}.  Donations to Haiku,
Inc. come almost entirely from private individuals, either directly to
Haiku, Inc. or through ``bounties'' and ``Thank You Awards'' from
HaikuWare \cite{HaikuIncDonors, HaikuWareBounties}, a repository of
pre-built software for Haiku as well as a hub for Haiku end-users
\cite{HaikuWareAbout}.

Haiku Release 1 Alpha 3 was published on June 20, 2011
\cite{HaikuRelease}.  It is available for free download from various
FTP and HTTP mirrors in the following formats \cite{HaikuGet}:
\begin{itemize}
\item ``Anyboot'' images -- which may be written to and booted from
  USB flash drives, hard disk drives or CD/DVD media
\item ISO images -- which may be written to CD media
\item VMDK images -- which are virtual machine disk files compatible
  with VMWare products as well as QEMU and VirtualBox \cite{VMDKWiki}
\end{itemize}
Any of the image formats may be used live, to try Haiku without
installing it, or to install Haiku to another disk volume
\cite{HaikuGet}.  The Haiku alpha release is also available for order
on a ``commemorative'' CD from Haiku, Inc. for a minimum donation of
\$10 per disc \cite{HaikuIncOrder}.  Source code for this release is
also available for download in compressed archived form
\cite{HaikuR1A3Src}.

The latest Haiku source code can be obtained directly from the source
code repository \cite{HaikuGetSvn} and nightly snapshot builds are
available as downloadable images from the Haiku Files archive
\cite{HaikuFiles}.

The Haiku release (anyboot) is approximately 250MB in size compressed
\cite{HaikuGet} and 700MB uncompressed.  The installed system also
takes up about 700MB of disk space, not including the size of a swap
file, which is 2GB by default.  The source distribution is split into
two files.  One containing the Haiku build tools, comprised almost
entirely of customized third party software (e.g. GCC, binutils) and
having an uncompressed size of about 530MB, and the other containing
the Haiku system sources proper and having approximately the same
uncompressed size \cite{HaikuR1A3Src}.  The Haiku system sources
contain about 5.5 million lines of C and C++ code and headers, not
including blank or comment lines, as reported by CLOC \cite{Cloc}.

\section{Installation and Startup}

See figure \ref{fig:foo}.

\begin{figure}[h]
\centering
\includegraphics{figs/somefig.mps}
\caption{Foo.}
\label{fig:foo}
\end{figure}

\section{Basic Operation}

WERDS.

\section{Usage Evaluation}

MOAR WERDS.

\bibliography{haiku}{}
\bibliographystyle{plain}

\end{document}
